Good afternoon.
Welcome.
This is Creating Great Automator Actions:
Advanced Topics.
I'm Kerry Hazelgren,
and hopefully most of you were able to
attend the session earlier this morning,
Creating Great Automator Actions:
The Basics.
That session dealt mostly with
what you can do today in Tiger to
create great Automator Actions.
In this session, though,
we will focus mostly on Leopard and a
couple of advanced topics for Tiger.
So let's start.
We're going to start by giving
a brief overview of some of
the new features that we have
planned for Leopard for Automator.
And then we will go into some
of those features in depth.
And then we'll talk about
application integration,
which is a new thing that we've
added for Leopard where you can
actually integrate Automator
workflows into your application.
Okay,
so what is new for Automator in Letbird?
First of all, we have variables.
And this is a great new way for actions
in a workflow to be able to share data
which is independent from the actual
data that's running through the workflow.
And we'll talk about this in
depth and give some demos on it.
Okay,
so what is new for Automator in Letbird?
First of all, we have variables.
And this is a great new way for actions
in a workflow to be able to share data
which is independent from the actual
data that's running through the workflow.
And we'll talk about this in
depth and give some demos on it.
Okay,
so what is new for Automator in Letbird?
First of all, we have variables.
And this is a great new way for actions
in a workflow to be able to share data
which is independent from the actual
data that's running through the workflow.
And we'll talk about this in
depth and give some demos on it.
Next we have Automatic Serialization.
It's kind of a long title
and a complex topic,
but we will go into that further
in depth in a few minutes.
And lastly, performance improvements.
Yay!
I actually wanted
Lightning McQueen on here,
but they told me that nothing
could possibly be that fast.
But I tried to convince them and
basically we're left with this.
But the point is,
Automator has got a lot of
performance improvements,
both in the UI and workflow execution.
We've done a lot to try and
streamline and speed everything up.
So we wanted to highlight that.
So let's go into some
of the new features.
We're going to talk
about variables first,
then automatic serialization,
and then we're going to talk about the
To finish up,
sort of with defining data types
and creating conversion actions,
two topics which pretty
much go hand in hand.
So let's start with variables.
Variables, you can think of variables
as global variables.
They're a way that actions in
the workflow can share data.
So, for example,
if you have an action that
creates a new folder and then an
action that creates a disk image
and one that creates a package,
they can all share a variable that
would represent the name of the folder,
the name of the disk image,
the name of the package.
And you can,
every time you run the workflow,
you can just change the value of that
variable and it will change the entire
behavior of the workflow without actually
modifying the actions themselves.
So they're really flexible.
We've given you four types for now,
and you can set them either in the UI or
you can set the values programmatically,
and we'll talk about that.
One thing you do need to do is to add
support for variables to your actions,
but it's really easy to do.
The first thing you need to do is
we've created a palette because
we provided a couple new classes.
So there's a new Automator palette
that's compatible with Interface Builder
3 and it's located in Developer Extras,
Palettes,
and is called Automator Palette.
Simple enough.
So just load that up.
And then we've got two controls
that support variables.
The first is text fields.
So you'll want to change any text fields
in your action UIs to token fields.
And there's a somewhat fuzzy screenshot.
We don't have high DPI yet.
But there's a screenshot,
and that's what a variable
looks like in a text field.
It's a token, just like you would
see in a mail message.
Then also pop-up buttons
support variables.
And if you have an NSPopupButton,
you will want to change
that to NSPopupButton.
and pop-up button.
And you can see there's a little
variables icon next to the value.
Before I go to the demo,
there is one other control,
the AM Path pop-up button,
which we introduced in
Tiger for Automator.
If you have one of those,
we use them a lot in Apple's actions,
they support variables automatically.
That's one thing you
don't have to mess with.
So to demo variables,
I'm going to bring up the
engineer that was mostly
responsible for implementing them,
and you may have seen her this morning,
and that would be Emily Kim.
Emily?
Hi, so if you didn't see the
session this morning,
I'm Emily, and we're going to talk about
a little bit about variables.
So what I'm going to show in this demo
is how you can change the controls
in your action to take advantage of
the variable features in Automator,
and then we're going to take a quick
look at how these variables can be
extremely useful in your workflows.
So to the demo machine, please.
So here I have a project.
This action imports photos into iPhoto.
So all I have to do is open up
the Nib in Interface Builder.
And here I have my text field.
And I'm going to show the inspector.
And here all I have to do is
change its class to AM Token Field,
just like that.
Save it.
And that's actually all I have to do.
So now I have already a built version
that I'm going to use to show you.
And we're going to get some pictures.
And that's actually what I just did
was drag some files into Automator.
In case you didn't
know you could do that,
it'll create a get specified
finder items for you,
and I think that's very exciting.
So then we'll make a new folder,
get the pictures out of the folder,
and then we are going to import
these photos into iPhoto.
And to take advantage of variables,
let's say I want to have,
this is actually a workflow that
I use when I'm getting the photos
from my camera onto my computer.
And so I like to keep them in a
separate folder and then I import them
into iPhoto without taking advantage
of iPhoto's directory structure.
So I'm going to have a
variable here called album.
Its value is nature.
And so I'm going to put it
in the name of my new folder.
And I also want it in my album name.
So, nice auto complete.
And then I can also add the
current date to my album,
which is what I often do in iPhoto.
And this is also extremely useful
because currently there are a lot
of Automator actions which just say
append current date to this file name.
And now you can just use variables
and put that wherever you want.
So you can see we have that.
And then as Kerry mentioned,
we also have support
for Path Popup buttons.
So I can drag a path type
variable into one of those.
So now what I have here is a workflow
which takes some photos and creates
a new folder with a name that I've
specified in a variable in a destination
that I've specified also as a variable.
And then it imports them into
iPhoto using the album name,
which is the same as the folder name,
as well as the current date.
So what happens when I run this?
We're going to hit run.
And here you can see it's imported
the photos into an album that has a
variable name and the current date.
So, that's kind of exciting,
but what if I just hard-coded
nature and the date in and
that would have been fine?
Well now what I can do is I can actually
change the value of this variable
to something like pretty pictures,
and then maybe change the photos since
I already have these to these photos.
And maybe I also want to
change the format of my date.
I want to change it to this one now.
So all I have to do is change
those and run the workflow again
and you can see now I have another
album called Pretty Pictures and
a current date in a new format.
You can see how this could
become extremely useful,
especially with path pop-up,
with A and path pop-up buttons,
if you keep your variables.
If you have a lot of actions
that are dealing with data
going all into the same place,
you can set the path once in
the beginning of your workflow
and it will use that same path
for the rest of the workflow.
Additionally,
we also have a new results feature.
If you just turn the action over,
you can see results on the other side in
a better form than what we currently had,
which was this.
Now we have also,
you can see them as a list or
you can see them as pictures.
That's that.
Back to slides, please.
Thanks Emily.
She promised she would be nicer to
me than she was to Todd this morning.
So far, so good.
Okay, so the next topic is
Automatic Serialization.
And basically this is a way whereby
Automator can take the data that
is flowing through a workflow
and serialize it so that actions
can just receive one piece of
input at a time and loop over them.
Now I said loop.
It is essentially looping,
but it is not the kind of
looping you would expect because
it's not user configurable.
It's based on certain
properties of the action.
So we didn't really
want to call it looping.
We call it automatic serialization.
And I've got a nice diagram to
demonstrate or to explain it.
So in Tiger, in a typical workflow,
you would start with a
group of data such as this.
And the first action would receive that
data and it would iterate over the data.
Essentially it would
loop inside the action.
From that action to the
next action to the next.
And then you would have your
output again essentially a list.
Automator and Tiger dealt
mostly with lists of data.
So, this works great for most
workflows and most actions,
but for a certain class of actions,
it can be really problematic.
If the task is to open
open a Photoshop file, for example,
and you get past a list of 50 of them,
you don't really want to be
opening 50 Photoshop documents.
At the same time,
you would quickly eat up
all your system resources.
In fact, one of our developers developed
a suite of Photoshop document
or Photoshop automator actions,
and he had to come up with a clever
workaround for this sort of a workflow.
The good news is, though,
we made that a lot easier.
And the only thing you have to do to
take advantage of it is change the input
type of your action from list to single.
And I'll show you how to do that.
You may have seen a little
bit of that this morning.
So if you do that,
let's look at how a workflow
in Leopard would behave.
So we have five actions here.
And the first one and the last
one take a single list input.
The center three, however,
take single input.
So once we run this workflow,
we'll get a list of data,
and the first action will
iterate over that data until
it is finished processing it.
Well then at this point,
Automator is going to say the next
three actions require single input
and the added criteria is that they
are part of the same application.
So they're all Photoshop actions,
they're all iTunes actions,
they're all your application's actions.
So at that point,
Automator will create a loop
and it will just send the first
item of data through that loop.
"And then it will go to the second,
and the third, and the fourth,
and it will temporarily hold
the results of that loop."
Until it is completed,
iterating all of the data.
So once it has done that,
then it'll send that
through to the next action,
which will receive a list as it requires.
"And it will process it and all is good.
So it works, most actions will work just
the same if it's good for them.
But actions which need this behavior,
require it really,
can take advantage of it.
So it's not for every action,
but if it is a data intensive action,
this is really handy.
So all you need to do to set your action
to single input is open up the project,
select your target.
And in the inspector,
under the container type, input type,
select single.
This was mostly unused in Tiger,
so most of your actions
most likely are set to list,
but you can take advantage
of that and set it to single.
[Transcript missing]
So here I have a workflow.
And it's going to start
with getting some files.
Copy files to the
desktop with this action.
I have slightly modified
versions of Flip Images,
Crop Images, and Scale Images that
all take single input.
All I did was change the
input type of those actions.
It will end up with
Open Images and Preview,
which is another list type input action.
As you can see, when this runs,
it's going to copy them
all to the desktop,
but then it's going to loop
over each item of data,
just processing them one at
a time until it completes.
The last action got all of the data at
once because it opened them all as a set.
[Transcript missing]
Again, it's not for most actions,
but if this sort of behavior
is important to your action,
please go ahead and take a look at
it and see if it's right for you.
Now the next feature.
is defining custom data types.
The typical scenario of an
Automator Action Developer,
well, an Apple Script Automator
Action Developer,
is you have a scriptable application,
and it defines in its scripting
terminology certain objects,
and you want to create an Automator
Action that will deal with those objects.
We do that with mail actions.
Like mail messages is
a type that we define.
Mailboxes, et cetera, iTunes songs,
those are all data types
that we have defined.
So if you're creating an action
that has an input type or an output
type of one of your custom objects,
then you'll want to define a
data type so that Automator knows
how to work with that object.
Data types in Automator are UTIs.
And UTIs are simple strings,
reverse domain name formatted strings,
that can represent any object.
And Automator defines a number of them,
which you can, let's see,
in the Automator Programming Guide,
there's a whole list of
types that Automator defines.
We have types for strings and
paths and all sorts of things.
I can't name them all right here,
but we have a lot of them.
And so you can use these existing types,
but a lot of times you will
need to define your own.
So how do you do that?
What you want to do is
come up with your string,
your UTI, and then you'll want to
create a definition bundle.
"Or a definition file, as we call it.
And what you want to do is open up Xcode
and go to the new project template.
You will see a definition
bundle type there.
Select that, open it up,
and what you will see is a property list
where you can add or define your types
there along with the human readable name.
That is important because
Automator in various locations
displays the name of your type.
Automator behind the scenes acts
on the UTI type but displays the
human readable name to the user.
Amen.
So once you've got that,
just build it and install it.
And it can go in any of the appropriate
library automator type locations.
Or it can even go in the
bundle of your application.
If you put a library slash automator
folder in the bundle of your app,
you can put a definition file in there.
You can even put actions in there.
Don't know if you knew,
but you can put actions in there.
And once your app is installed,
Automator will automatically
see those actions.
And they'll be loaded
when Automator starts up.
But you're not really done there,
because defining a custom data type
isn't the whole story to allowing
Automator to play with your object.
Because it needs to really be able to
convert from your custom object type to
other types that it already knows about.
And that's where
conversion actions come in.
Emily talked a little bit about
conversion actions this morning.
But basically what they do
is they convert or filter
"Your data that's flowing
through a workflow.
An example of filtering it would be an
action that outputs files and folders
and the next action requires image files.
So the conversion action
would just filter out anything
that isn't an image file.
The cases of actually converting data or
things like in this example where we have
an action that outputs an iTunes song,
well the next one requires
files and folders.
So what the conversion action does,
which gets executed automatically,
it just takes a property.
I think the path to the song is
a property of an iTunes song.
So it extracts that property
and passes that along.
So conversion actions are really
important for your actions to
be able to seamlessly coexist
in the whole Automator world.
The way that you create
an Automator Action,
they're really just special
types of Automator Actions.
You would follow all of the steps to
create a regular Automator Action,
but
It has no UI,
so you don't have to worry about that.
You can, in fact, delete the main nib.
And then you want to take one
more step and change the product
extension from Action to C Action.
And that's all there is to it.
That's actually the
really important part.
You can leave the main nib if you want.
It won't get shown.
But the one thing that Automator
looks at is the product extension.
And if it's a C action,
it considers that a conversion action.
And I'm not going to
go into how to do it.
We demoed that last year.
And there's documentation on it in
the Automator Programming Guide.
But just to give you a little
understanding about why conversion
actions are important and how they
exist with your custom objects
and your custom data types.
And now we get to go on to
the really exciting part.
This is the part that
I worked on for Leopard.
New for Leopard,
you are able to load an Automator
workflow in your application,
execute it, and receive the results back
in your application as well.
We have new APIs and new objects
that allow you to do this.
[Transcript missing]
So here's the new objects
in the Automator framework.
The controller object obviously
acts as the link between
AM workflow and AM workflow view.
Now these are the same objects
the Automator itself uses.
The view especially is the same
view that you see in Automator
and we'll show it later in a demo.
You may have seen, if you recall in the
Developer Tools State of the Union,
Todd demonstrated an
Automator workflow in Xcode.
So, AM Workflow.
This is the model object for a workflow,
and you load it simply by passing
it a URL to an Automator workflow.
Then you can access the properties,
or the actions rather, and the input,
and the variables as well.
The NaM Workflow Controller is the
controller object that is mostly
responsible for running a workflow.
It also has a set of delegate methods
that you can optionally implement to get
progress on the running of the workflow.
You can use it to run a workflow,
such as when the
workflow starts or stops,
when an action starts
running or stops running,
or when an error occurs.
And then there's AM Workflow View,
which is not yet present,
but it will be for Leopard,
and will allow you to view
the actions in a workflow,
edit them, add, remove, delete,
all of that.
So that behavior,
like creating new workflows,
is not yet present in the seed,
but it will be.
So what you can do currently is
you can still load a workflow,
change the value of a variable,
and save your changes.
So here's a little bit of code
on how you would load a workflow.
You would start by a URL or a
path to an Automator document,
and you would pass that to
AM workflow, init with contents of URL,
and then there's also an error parameter.
And then if the result is nil,
then an error occurred and
you can inspect the error.
Then how would you get the variables?
Pretty simple-- value
for variable with name.
And that will return you
the value of a variable.
You do have to know the names
of the variables beforehand.
There isn't an accessor method
to get all of the variables,
because that doesn't really make
sense in an Automator workflow,
because you don't know for
a given variable name what
the actual function of it is.
So we envision this typically as a
developer would create a workflow
to perform some specific task,
and then you would save that and bundle
it possibly in the bundle of your app.
And then you can load it at will,
or when it makes sense to you,
and set the values of the variables
before you execute the workflow.
So that's getting it and then setting
the value of a variable you would
call set value for variable with name.
Okay,
so when it comes time to run a workflow,
there are actually two
different ways to do it.
And one is really, really easy,
and the other one is just really easy.
"We have a class method,
so it's a single line in AM workflow.
And then we have, and I'll show you that,
and then we have AM workflow controller,
which, um,
It's a little more work,
but you get more control.
And workflows, actually,
when you run them,
they will run in a separate process.
They will not run in your
application's memory space.
So the point of that is if the
workflow or an action in the
workflow crashes while it's running,
it won't bring down your application.
And you're also protected from errors and
memory leaks and all sorts of that bad
stuff that we don't like to talk about.
Okay, so here's how you run a
workflow from the class method.
Again,
start with a URL to an Automator workflow
and then hand it off to AMWorkflow,
run workflow at URL with input,
and the input is optional.
and then there's an
error parameter as well.
So if an error happens, well if it runs
successfully and completes,
you'll get,
because it runs synchronously,
you'll get the results.
If the results are nil,
then an error occurred.
You shouldn't try and inspect
the error if the results aren't
nil because we won't have set
the error parameter to anything.
We're not going to set it to nil,
we're just not going to even touch it.
So just ignore it if there was no
error or if the results were not nil.
But if the results were nil,
then the error will be an
NSError object that you can inspect
to find out what went wrong.
I show the error code.
We've published also in the
Automator Framework a list of
the error codes that we return,
so you should be able to
get a nice description of,
or at least understand what happened.
All right, so let's demo.
We're going to demo AM Workflow,
the class method.
And I should probably show it this way
if you went to the earlier session,
because that'll make more sense to you.
And we're going to have
Emily demonstrate it for you.
Kerry may have written this feature,
but I was the one who wrote the
cool action we're about to demo,
so... Switch to the demo machine, please.
Here I have a copy of
TextEdit that I already built,
and so I'm going to open up this.
I learned from the earlier session.
I apologize if anyone couldn't see
from the back from the earlier session,
so I've learned now.
And we're going to convert this to, say,
NubText.
That's great.
And you can see that we can,
straight from TextEdit, convert,
basically run Automator
workflows on the input.
Oh wow, this is completely legible.
So to see how we did that,
we can open up the TextEdit project
and here just in the controller
in TextEdit we have a setNudeText.
And so you can see that we take
the text that was in the document
and we find the workflow and then
as Kerry pointed out in his slide,
we simply run workflow at
URL with the input that was
in the text document already.
Then we get the result and we basically
put it back into the text document.
And that's that easy.
As he said, it was really, really easy.
So that's TextEdit and I'll hand
it back to Kerry so he can show
you just the really easy way.
Back to slides.
Thanks, Emily.
Emily came from MIT, so people like that,
I mean, they can read stuff like this.
It's illegible to me.
Okay, so running a workflow with
AM Workflow Controller.
It's a little more work in that
you need to actually load an
AM Workflow object and then load
an AM Workflow Controller object,
but it's still just a few lines of code.
And the delegate is optional, but
You will need to implement certain
delegate methods if you need to
know when the workflow finished,
for example, so you can get the
output of the workflow,
because it runs asynchronously.
So this is a bit of
code on how that works.
We have starting with a
URL to a workflow object,
then we're going to use
that to load an AM workflow.
Then once we have that, we'll allocate an
AMWorkflowController object,
which is a simple init method.
Then we'll use that controller
object and we'll set the workflow.
We'll set the delegate,
in this case to be self.
"And then we'll tell it to run.
And it'll go off and it'll run.
Runs in a separate process.
And if we've got our
delegate methods implemented,
we'll know when it finished.
And we can go and get the actions,
we can get the output from each action.
And most likely you're interested
in the output of the last action,
which is the output of
the entire workflow."
[Transcript missing]
Okay, now I'm going to demo.
I'm going to show you essentially
the same thing that you saw in the
developer tools state of the union
where we've got it running in Xcode,
but then I'm going to show you a little
bit of the code and how we did that.
So if I have, for example,
I have got an action project here.
Demo machine?
There we go.
Okay, I have an action project here
and I can just go to the Xcode
application menu and here I've got some
workflows that I've built into Xcode.
The first one is to create a disk
image and it'll take the product
or the action that this project
builds and it will package it up.
and then take the package and put it
into a disk image that we're ready to
send off to our beta testers or whoever.
Now the nice thing about this,
and it shows the really
really,
really useful integration of AM workflow
and variables is that Xcode actually,
before it loaded and showed you this,
it set the values of the
variables in this workflow.
So like right here,
the product name has already been sent,
set to the product name of
this particular project,
and the product version has been
read and set for this project.
So each, no matter what project you open,
those variables will be set and will be
relevant to the project that you're in.
And so if we run this, we
We should see that it's going to
create a package there on the desktop.
[Transcript missing]
So that's AM Workflow Controller,
and that's new and supposedly
totally functional in Leopard.
So that's all we have for today,
and we've learned a lot of important
things about Automator in Leopard.
Variables, an important new feature,
and automatic serialization for those
of you who have data-intensive actions,
and also application integration
and how to create and define custom
data types and conversion actions.
So for more information, go to
http://www.amworkflow.com/application-
integration/.
We have an Automator
Action Lab directly after this session,
well at 3:30.
And so come to us in the lab and
we'll try and answer any questions
you might have regarding Leopard
or Tiger or Automator Actions,
Conversion Actions, everything.
And then there's an
AppleScript Studio session
and lab tomorrow.
Sal Segoian, where's Sal?
Sal's there.
Sal, who you all know, is here.
And Todd Fernandez is the
Automation Tools Manager.
He knows how to create
great Automator Actions.
And then we also have an Automator
Developer's Mailing List.